Solomon Islands PM Has Millions in Property, Raising Questions Around Wealth

The prime minister of the Pacific Island nation has recently gone on a home-building spree, constructing eight valuable new houses in and around the capital city of Honiara.

Manasseh Sogavare, the four-time prime minister of Solomon Islands, speaks proudly of his humble origins as a school dropout who once earned a living cleaning toilets and making tea for British colonial officials.

The 69-year-old premier is modestly paid by the standard of world leaders, even after he received a 39-percent pay bump this month that raised his annual salary to 428,560 Solomon Islands dollars, or SBD (around US$50,000).

That relatively low paycheck, however, hasnt stopped Sogavare and his wife, Emmy, from securing large loans and massively increasing their real estate wealth over the past several years, an investigation by OCCRP and In-Depth Solomons has found.

The couple have built at least eight new houses on land they already owned in and around the capital, Honiara, reporters found. The construction costs are estimated to run as high as several million U.S. dollars.

Rick Houenipwela, himself a former prime minister who served directly before Sogavares most recent term, also lives close to the new houses in Lungga.

Houenipwelas own home is a sprawling structure cobbled together from typical local construction materials like gyprock, wood, and concrete blocks. He told reporters his own renovations had taken place at a pace more typical of Solomon Islands: in fits and starts.

This is not the first time the Sogavares real estate dealings have come into question.

In 2007, during Manasseh Sogavares second prime ministerial term, the couple raised eyebrows with the original purchase of the Lungga property.

The sale was made with the help of a SBD 2.5 million (about $350,000) mortgage from Australias ANZ bank  supported by a letter from the Embassy of Taiwan, in which the countrys government guaranteed that it would rent the property. Sogavare was a staunch ally of Taiwan at the time.
